[MUSIC]
Hello again, in this video we are going
to be talking about if, else if and else.
And we're gonna be resolving a problem we
have at the moment where the player can
simultaneously push up and down and
register two key presses or
up down and enter in register three.
That's not what we want, we want to have
that you can only push one at a time.
So if we have a look at our
code as it is at the moment.
We've got three if statements.
We've talked about
the structure of if being,
if this particular condition is true.
That's why if is a conditional, this
is true, then do this particular thing.
At the moment we're saying if that's true,
do this, if that's true do that,
if that's true do that.
We don't have a situation, we don't
have a structure in here that says,
if that one's true well then don't
do any of these other things.
So let's have a look at our options.
We've already talked about if statement,
if this expression evaluates to true,
then execute all of these
statements within this code block.
You could have one, two, five,
ten statements within here,
do all of these particular
things if this is true.
We can also say, else if,
it's still an if statement but
because it says else,
we are only executing this if statement
if the preceding if statement
evaluated to false.
So if something happened up here,
then go off and
do it and don't even look at this else.
But we're saying else is another
way of saying otherwise.
If this is true, do that otherwise or
else do this particular if statement and
that again is if some expression is true
then execute the code within this block.
We could have again,
we could have a whole bunch of
statements within this code block.
We can also have a whole lot of else ifs.
So if thing number one is true, do that.
If thing number two, sorry,
else if thing number 2 is true, do that.
Else if thing number three is true,
do that.
Else if, and so on.
So we're gonna have a lot of
else ifs one after another.
And eventually we can get to the point
where we could as a catch all we can use
else which is another way of saying if
nothing else above has evaluated to true,
then just do this.
And again,
we execute the code in the code block.
So let's give a real world example here.
If the condition of being in the mood for
an MMO,
a massively multi play online games,
so if I'm in the mood for
an MMO, then play World of Warcraft,
that's the statements within here.
So the condition is if I'm in the mood for
an MMO, play World of Warcraft,
else if I'm in the mood for
an FPS then play Overwatch.
In other words,
if I'm not in the mood to play an MMO,
then how about playing
a first-person shooter?
Yeah, I'm in the mood for
that then play Overwatch.
However, if I'm not in the mood for
that, if this evaluates as false then
we can have our catch all of go to
bed because you know you should, so
if I'm not in the mood for that.
If you're a visual person let me just
give you this as a flow diagram here.
MMO, yeah, why not?
That's true, yes I'm in the mood for
an MMO, then I'll Play WoW.
If it's false,
no I'm not in the mood for an MMO,
then I'll consider a first person shooter.
If I'm in the mood for that,
if that evaluates as true,
then I'll play Overwatch.
Or if I'm not in the mood for a first
person shooter, then I'll go to bed.
So this is the flow, this happens first,
that happens second,
and then this happens if all of these
other conditions are evaluated to false.
When we look at our code here, we can
see that we need to have some mutually
exclusive set up in here
that I can do this, and
if I'm not presently doing that then okay,
I can do this.
And if I'm not presently doing that,
So that is the structure for our challenge
here, to produce straightforward if you've
understood this concept, and if you've
done a bit of programming before,
this will be a piece of cake and
you know how to do this straightaway.
And the challenge is to allow only one
key option to be pressed down at a time,
so the player can only push one at a time.
So that's our challenge,
it's pretty straightforward,
just only a couple of key words that you
need to be adding into our existing code.
Give that your best shot and
I'll see you back here in a moment where
we can go through our solution together.
Our solution's pretty straightforward,
we need to leave our first if as an if and
then our other two if statements,
we need to make them, else if, so
it's saying if you're pushing a key,
if you're pushing the UpArrow, fantastic.
Push the UpArrow, stop there,
nothing else needs to be done.
Don't go to these other ones.
If you're not pushing the UpArrow,
then yeah, you've got an opportunity
to push the DownArrow.
If you're not pushing
the DownArrow else if,
we give you the opportunity
to push return.
So that's a way of us creating this
mutually exclusive setup were we can only
push one at a time, and in this particular
case there's no reason for us to put in
an else, cuz basically we just do nothing
if these other conditions aren't met.
Let's save that and jump back over to
unity, hit play again and then do a test.
I can push up, I can push down a couple
of times or I push them together.
You can probably hear me pushing
through the keyboard there.
Only one's being pushed, a little tip here
if you click collapse then you can see how
many times a particular thing is pushed.
If I push up, then you should see,
I need to click back in the game window,
just as a note to do that.
Push up, you can see the under up arrow
going up, up, up and then if I push down,
down's going down, if I pushed two at
the same time only one of them went up.
If I accidentally kinda pushed one,
two, then they both go up.
Okay, so we've created
mutually exclusive key presses
by using the else if conditional
statement within here.
Well done, great work,
I'll see you in the next video.